God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, may the words of my mouth and the meditations of our hearts be acceptable and pleasing to you, O Lord, our rock and our redeemer.
Amen.
So as usual, a bit of context before we jump in here.
Paul's writing this letter, the book of Romans, to the church in Rome, as the title may suggest.
Paul's never been to Rome yet, despite all of his missionary journeys, because most of those took place in what is now Greece and Turkey.
but he wants to go to Rome to visit with them and to proclaim the gospel there.
So at the outset of this letter, Paul's trying to make sure that he's on the same page as the Roman church, make sure they understand each other.
He's never met them, he wants to assure them that they believe in the same message of the gospel and that they are united as the body of Christ.
So in his introduction before our text this morning, Paul makes sure to let these believers in Rome know that he sees them as brothers and sisters in Christ, united under Jesus as spiritual inheritors of the Old Testament covenants.
Paul writes that he longs to see these believers, to encourage them with the message of the gospel, and he hopes that his visit will bear fruit just as he has seen his other missionary journeys bear fruit.
So that's the preamble.
That's the context that brings us to our text this morning.
So let's read then from Romans chapter 1 starting at verse 14.
Paul writes to the church in Rome, I am obligated both to Greeks and non-Greeks, both to the wise and to the foolish.
And that is why I am so eager to preach the gospel also to you who are in Rome.
For I am not ashamed of the gospel.
because it is the power of God that brings salvation to everyone who believes, first to the Jew, then to the Gentile.
For in the gospel, the righteousness of God is revealed, a righteousness that is by faith from first to last, just as it is written, the righteous will live by faith.
This is the word of the Lord.
Thanks be to God.
When Larissa and I lived in Ohio before we moved up here,
My main source of income was bartending at a couple of different craft breweries.
And when we were preparing several years ago to move to Ohio, and we knew that that was kind of where I was going to be doing most of my work, a lot of our friends and our family had a similar reaction to each other.
Most of them said something along lines of like, oh, bartending, that'll be great for pastoral ministry.
People really open up to their bartenders, right?
You'll be able to share a lot of things with them.
And that's kind of the posture that I had in mind as I went into that.
Like, okay, great.
Maybe I can use part of this job as a means to share the gospel.
But what I found more often than not is it was difficult for me to share the gospel or even to talk about my faith even when the opportunity presented itself on a platter to me.
You know, people would often ask, you know, why we had moved to Columbus, and I always found it far easier just to let them know what Larissa was working on and just leave it there.
It was only after a few years of getting to know some of my coworkers and some of our regulars more that I felt more comfortable speaking offhand about my faith.
I, unlike our brother Paul, was ashamed of the gospel.
And I felt ashamed many times when I would go home from work or when somebody would close their tab and leave when I realized I could have shared my faith with them.
I could have spoken a word of peace into their lives from God.
I could have even just asked them about their spirituality or their faith.
Are you ashamed of the gospel?
Have you found yourselves in situations where you know
that you can and should share with somebody the hope that you have in Christ, the community that you experience here in the church, the discernment that the Holy Spirit grants to you.
Even where you know you should ask someone if they would maybe be interested in coming to church on Sunday, watching our live stream, coming to an event that we're hosting.
How much easier is it for us to talk about the weather, the Olympics, other sports, even
politics than the gospel.
A shamed may be a bit of a strong term, but it's true, isn't it?
Nervous, anxious.
The heart of it, as Paul suggests here, is really shame.
But why?
Why are we afraid to share the gospel?
Why are we ashamed of the good news that Christ came into the world to save sinners like us?
Shouldn't that be something that we should shout from rooftop?
Shouldn't I be more excited to tell you about how God has been working in my life than I am to say that your favorite IPA is back on tap?
Why are we afraid?
It's just that.
It's fear.
We fear backlash.
We fear unpopularity.
We fear ridicule.
But our fear can be motivated by good desires too.
Maybe we fear that we'll say the wrong thing and that we'll turn someone off from wanting to go to church.
Maybe we're afraid because somebody might perceive our beliefs and our convictions as evil.
Maybe we're afraid because we have had experiences ourselves where we've been evangelized to or have been around people evangelizing and really harsh
or shallow ways.
We don't want to be like that.
Now if those are reasons why we're maybe afraid or ashamed of the gospel, the question that naturally arises from looking at our text this morning is why isn't Paul ashamed?
Why is he unashamed of the gospel outside of the fact that he is an apostle and so naturally one would think that it follows that he would not be ashamed of it?
The first reason why Paul is unashamed of the gospel comes to us in the first couple of verses of our text.
Paul says that he is obligated, both to Greeks and to non-Greeks, both to the wise and the foolish.
That is why he says, I'm so eager to preach the gospel also to you who are in Rome.
Paul is obligated to preach the gospel, obligated here, meaning indebted.
He owes something.
Now there are a couple of senses in which we can be indebted to someone.
Say, I borrow $500 from Daniel.
Now I am indebted to him until I can pay him back that money.
It's the most common way that we think of indebtedness.
But say, Crystal comes to me and gives me $500 and says, give this to Daniel, please.
Well, now I'm indebted to Daniel in a completely different way.
I am indebted to him until I give him this money that Crystal has entrusted me with.
That second part, that second way, that is how Paul is under obligation here.
He has been entrusted with the message of the gospel by God and is under obligation to share that message with the world.
So too, we have been entrusted with that message of the gospel.
We are indebted to the world just as much as Paul was to spread the message near and far.
The end of Matthew's gospel, chapter 28, Jesus commissions his disciples and us as his church.
Go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you.
Now, if Crystal gives me $500 and tells me to give it to Daniel, I'd be pretty excited to take parts in sharing this gift with Daniel, right?
How much more than should we be excited to share the gift of the gospel?
But that's not the only reason why Paul is unashamed of the gospel.
He says, I'm not ashamed of the gospel because it is the power of God that brings salvation to everyone who believes first to the Jew, then to the Gentile.
The gospel, Paul says, is the power of God.
I think that's great.
The gospel is the power of God.
It's not the something that we have to bring ourselves into the world.
It is from God.
It is powerful.
And in that power, there is transformation.
Paul knows this full well.
He tells the church in Corinth when he writes to them in 1 Corinthians.
He says that when he came to them,
He came in weakness with great fear and trembling.
He wrote to them, my message and my preaching were not with wise and persuasive words, but with a demonstration of the spirit's power so that your faith might not rest on human wisdom, but on God's power.
Paul was not always unashamed of the gospel.
He has had to learn to be unashamed of the gospel.
His own life certainly shows that.
Luke tells us in the book of Acts, Paul used to be this great persecutor of the church, breathing out murderous threats against the church, seeking to imprison anyone who followed Christ.
And after his dramatic 180 degree conversion on the road to Damascus, I would imagine that Paul felt a bit afraid, ashamed.
of the gospel, this message that he had been seeking to stamp out now suddenly entrusted to him, to bring to the world.
I'm sure Paul felt afraid that he would misrepresent this gospel messenger, say the wrong thing, turn people off from Christ due to his violent past.
Paul had to learn to be unashamed of the gospel.
And thanks to the transforming power that is inherent within the message of the gospel, we have here in writing in the book of Romans that same afraid man now unashamed and bold.
Paul knows firsthand the power of salvation that comes from God in the gospel.
Because if it can save him, chief among sinners as he admits to Timothy later, then the gospel can save anyone who believes.
So because of this, Paul can overcome just about any temptation to be ashamed of the gospel because he remembers that this message of the gospel, which is foolishness to those who do not believe, is power from God.
That is for salvation for all who do believe.
Now, of course, that call to remembrance is for us as well.
How have we been shaped or transformed by the renewing of our minds to the power of God proclaimed in his word?
How as being a follower of Christ changed us, brought us closer to God.
By remembering and giving testimony to how the power of the gospel has transformed our lives, we too can feel our fears and misgivings assuaged and be empowered anew by the Holy Spirit to be unashamed.
Again, if we go to Jesus at the end of Matthew's gospel, all authority, he says, in heaven and on earth has been given to me, therefore go.
Authority, the word in Greek, exusia, it means power.
All power, Jesus says, in heaven and on earth has been given to me, so then go.
God's power undergirds and supports us as we are sent out with this message that we are entrusted with.
So Paul, Paul is unashamed of the gospel.
He's under obligation to preach it.
He's unashamed of the gospel because he remembers the power of God that is at work within it.
Finally, then Paul writes to the Romans and to us, he says that in the gospel, the righteousness of God is revealed.
A righteousness that is by faith from first to last, just as it is written, the righteous will live by faith.
The righteousness of God.
The righteousness of God can be a few different things.
Paul could mean a few different things, different writers in the Bible.
Pretty consistently, we'll refer to the righteousness of God, meaning three different kind of aspects of righteousness.
The first being righteousness as an aspect of God, an attribute of God.
God's justice, God's love.
Like we can say, we have a God who is righteous.
The righteousness of God can also refer to a status that is a gift from God.
We can say, in Christ, God grants us his righteousness that we may be rescued from our sins and be put into a right relationship with God.
Finally, the righteousness of God can be a reference to God's activity of salvation in the world.
And I think here it's in that last sense that Paul has in mind.
That doesn't mean that the other two aren't being referenced at all.
God is, of course, certainly righteous.
God certainly bestows upon us a status of righteousness in Christ.
But for the purpose of these passages in Romans 1 here, it seems like Paul's referring more to this aspect of God's righteousness and justice as his saving work in the world.
Now, Paul doesn't explicitly say justification by faith in these verses, but that's what he's getting at.
There's this doctrine that the righteousness that we need
to be made right before God is granted to us by faith in Christ.
That kind of gets at there's power of God in the gospel.
That also is why I said Paul may be referencing multiple aspects of righteousness here because God's righteousness justifies us before God.
But in the gospel, this righteousness is saving work in the world is revealed by faith.
As the prophet Habakkuk says, that's what Paul's quoting at the end here.
The righteous will live by faith.
Paul also uses this verse from Habakkuk in the letter to the Galatians, Galatians chapter three, to talk about how we are justified before God by faith.
Paul is unashamed of the gospel because in its message, God's saving work is revealed.
In the gospel, our eyes are opened and we can see our fallenness before God, but also God's immense love for us and grace to us in Christ.
That is the good news.
Paul writes in his first letter to Timothy, he says, even though I was once a blasphemer and a persecutor and a violent man, I was shown mercy.
because I acted in ignorance and unbelief.
The grace of our Lord was poured out on me abundantly along with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
Here's a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance.
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners of whom I am the worst.
But it is for that reason that I was shown mercy so that in me, the worst of sinners, Christ Jesus might display his immense patience.
as an example for those who would believe in Him and receive eternal life.
And now to that King, internal and mortal and visible, the only God be honor and glory forever and ever, amen.
If we have that good news, why are we afraid and ashamed to share it?
If we follow the example here of our brother Paul, we too can find it easier to be unashamed and unafraid of that gospel as we follow after Christ.
as we take seriously Jesus' commission on our lives for us to go and to spread that message.
I have found that to be true.
I found that to be true in my interactions with people as I was bartending.
God, if God has entrusted me with the message of the gospel to bring it to the world, that makes it easier for me to give an honest response and testimony if somebody says, hey, what do you Christians think about insert thing here?
If the gospel is the power of God and not something that I have to bring, it makes it easier to be able to testify to that in my own life.
Being able to share how God has transformed me, given me His peace, that makes it easier to be more unashamed.
I have seen the power of the gospel turn hearts and minds closer to Christ.
The gospel is God's righteous work of salvation in the world.
It is the good news, and people want to hear good news.
My friends, in a world that is falling apart seemingly more and more, people want to hear something good.
People want to know peace, and we have that peace.
I have found more often than not, people want to know peace, even the peace that is found in Christ if we are honest about it.
If we are confident in sharing that peace, we are often afraid of social backlash or ridicule if we share the gospel.
And yeah, that happens.
It does.
It happens sometimes.
But you know what the reassuring thing is about the gospel being the power of God and not your own?
It is not up to us on our own to convince anyone of anything.
The Holy Spirit will do that through us.
As Paul told the Corinthians, we do not need to be eloquent or persuasive.
Instead, we can be honest and vulnerable and let God take it from there to speak through us.
That's what speaks to people's hearts and minds.
A good example of this is one of my regulars at the brewery when I first met him was a pretty staunch atheist.
He had in his head what he thought Christianity was all about, what Christians were like and wanted absolutely nothing to do with it.
Now thanks be to God over the years I was able to seize opportunities to share with him why I'm a believer, why I'm a disciple of Christ, why I feel called to preach the gospel.
Now he's still not a Christian.
I do pray that God will continue working in his heart, but this guy will readily admit now that in my sharing of my faith with him, he has softened his view of Christianity and expressed some interest even in dipping his toe into church.
So what's the point here then?
Do these three things and you'll be unashamed of the gospel.
Three quick ways to boost your evangelism skills.
I mean, it's kind of there, but not entirely.
Just because I've got a couple of good stories about sharing my faith with people while bartending, that doesn't mean that I'm some great evangelist yet.
I still find myself being hesitant from time to time to talk about the gospel, even though that's literally my job.
To bring this home in a very practical sense.
Last month we had our mission vision values potluck where the deacons solicited some feedback and ideas from y'all about the discernment process to reach our community here in Midland to address food insecurity and loneliness Again, please stay after the service and help us package meals as part of that There was a lot of good feedback that came out of that time, but something that really
Something really stuck out to the deacons and to myself that has kind of helped guide some of the planning and discernment.
So I ought to read that for you.
This is from the feedback.
It says, teen feedback.
Be careful to focus on modeling and showing God's love.
Invite people in, invite people for a meal, but don't immediately evangelize or preach at people.
We want to have a safe space for people to be.
First of all, thank you to whichever of our youth articulated that and gave us that feedback.
As I said, that's been a guide for the deacons as they've been discerning how to minister to our community.
And really, that feedback helped shape some of this sermon because what I hear in that is what I was talking about earlier.
having some apprehension in sharing the gospel because we've seen it done badly or we've seen it done harshly before.
That we've felt pressure to push people into a conversation when they may or may not be ready to preach the gospel at people and not to them.
But again, we can look to the example that our brother in Christ Paul set for us in his ministry.
He writes this again to the Corinthians and 1 Corinthians.
Paul says, though I am free and belong to no one, I have made myself a slave to everyone, to win as many as possible.
To the Jews, I became like a Jew, to win the Jews.
To those under the law, I became like one under the law, so as to win those under the law.
To those not having the law, I became like one not having the law.
So as to when those not having the law to the weak, I became weak to win the weak.
I have become all things to all people so that by all possible means I might save some.
I do all of this for the sake of the gospel that I may share in its blessings.
Paul's posture as can be seen throughout the book of Acts and all of his letters is one of being in relation with people.
Time and time again he seeks to get to know people's culture, their lives, their inner workings, that he can share the gospel in a way that makes sense to their situation.
This is perhaps best seen in Acts 17 when Paul is in Athens.
He gives his great speech in the Ariapagos using fancy rhetorical tools and techniques that the Athenians were used to in their philosophical and spiritual debates.
so that he could better proclaim the message of the gospel to them using means that they were already familiar with.
Christ does this as well.
The gospels are chock full of Jesus getting to know people, eating with them in their homes, getting to know them in their social circles and their synagogues.
They're everyday lives and relating to them.
Jesus meets us where we are, it is often said.
He meets us where we are.
and then calls us to something better.
That is the posture that Paul used throughout his ministry, and it is a posture that allows us as well to better be unashamed of the gospel message.
So as we go out into the world then, let's go as Paul went, let's go as Jesus went, seeking to be able to relate to everyone that we come into contact with.
So we can better speak the gospel into their lives.
Let us be unashamed of the gospel message.
Let us go with the backing of Jesus' powerful authority to go into the world near and far to make disciples.
Because, my friends, we have been entrusted with this message of good news from God to bring to the world.
Because it is God's transforming power that has transformed our lives.
And because this good news is God's righteous and salvific work
in the world.
Let us go and let us be unashamed.
Amen.
Now as we seek to respond to this message today, as we seek to respond to God's call for us to not be ashamed of the gospel, of course we have a few things to consider.
You can grab one of those little yellow slips in your pews.
write down a reflection, some thoughts, some notes, maybe drop it into the offering plate later.
Things to consider, how are we ashamed of the gospel?
How am I ashamed of the gospel in my everyday life right now?
Is there an instance maybe that you can think of recently where you felt the Holy Spirit's leading?
You felt that you were handed an opportunity to share the gospel with someone and you backed out of it?
We can think about what difference does it make to us?
What difference does it make in your mind if you consider that you are entrusted with this message of hope?
Or that it's God's power, not your own power being brought into the world?
That God wants to partner with us through the working of the Holy Spirit.
How does that change your posture?
May you think about how the gospel has transformed your life.
How has the gospel transformed my life?
Where has God worked within me?
And how can I share that testimony with others?
Where is the Holy Spirit leading me to get to know someone more?
Where is the Holy Spirit starting to push me at work, at the bar, at baseball practice?
to get to know someone so that I can share the gospel with them.